[RFC] TLS Remote Attestation (#1929)
project-oak/oak: rfcs/01929_tls_attestation.md

# RFC#01929: Remote Attestation via TLS

## Objective

Remotely attest applications in Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) over the

> TLS protocol.

Reviewer: Please generalize the RFC to be about arbitrary assertions / claims, as discussed. TEE remote attestation may be one prominent example in the RFC, but the protocol must be more generic.

e.g. see https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5705#section-1 :

> A typical example is DTLS-SRTP [DTLS-SRTP], a key
   management scheme for the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)
   that uses DTLS to perform a key exchange and negotiate the SRTP
   [RFC3711] protection suite and then uses the DTLS master_secret to
   generate the SRTP keys.

## Background

A lot of existing applications that would benefit from the remote attestation
use **TLS protocol** to create secure channels with their clients. But
integrating the remote attestation might bring up unnecessary complications in a
form of completely rewriting the application connection logic.

Thus, instead of refactoring existing applications and implementing a new
protocol, we propose to integrate remote attestation into TLS by
cryptographically binding **TLS sessions** to the TEE platform.

## Overview

In order to allow applications to use TLS for remote attestation, we propose to
cryptographically bind assertions to a TLS session, by deriving

> [Exported Keying Material](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5705) from the TLS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Exported Keying Material](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5705) from an already established TLS
```

root key), thus confirming the authenticity of TEE platform keys.

Another important note is that the current version of the attestation protocol
prohibits
[TLS session resumption](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-2.2),
because the attestation takes place on the application level and it would need
to be redone once the TLS session is resumed.

#### Token Derivation

Exported Keying Material is derived using
[HKDF](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-7.5) from the TLS session
master secret and a set of parameters:

- _Label_
  - Label is required to disambiguate different applications that use the same
    Exported Keying Material mechanism
- _Context_
  - Allows the application to mix its own data the pseudo-randomly generated
    Exported Keying Material
- _Length_
  - Bit length of the generated value

It’s important to note that with a fixed set of parameters Exported Keying
Material value for a given TLS session stays the same - i.e. it’s a
deterministic algorithm. Thus if both client and server negotiate corresponding
parameters (or they are constant), they can derive equal Exported Keying
Material values.

> Exported Keying Material is prefixed with the purpose string

Reviewer: Unclear what this means; AFAICT it is not true that the exported keying material is prefixed with this; rather, it must be prefixed with this before being used

> `“TLSAttestationV1”`. This purpose string is used to disambiguate the proper use

Reviewer: Rename the purpose to something more generic, not related to attestation.

> `“TLSAttestationV1”`. This purpose string is used to disambiguate the proper use

Reviewer: Clarify whether quotes are included or not (and use straight quotes anyways).

of the Exported Keying Material, i.e. helps mitigate confusion where Exported
Keying Material that is generated for one purpose is misused for another.

Exported Keying Material that was derived with a specific set of parameters and
prefixed with the purpose string will be called a **Token** throughout this
document. Such Token is derived separately with a different set of parameters

> for any given [assertion](#assertions) type provided by the firmware.

Reviewer: No firmware is involved in assertions in general (e.g. for a public key assertion)

##### Parameters

Because Token derivation involves a TLS session master secret, TLS server should

> guarantee **Perfect Forward Secrecy**, which is defined as follows:

Reviewer: citation needed

Author: Done

| TLS master key will not be compromised even if long-term secrets used in its exchange are compromised |
| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

This means that if Token parameters are leaked, an attacker would still need the
TLS session master secret, so they won’t be able to reconstruct the Token.

> In order to guarantee _Perfect Forward Secrecy_ the server needs to:

Reviewer: citation needed

Author: Done

  key exchange:
  - [Ephemeral Diffie-Hellman (DHE)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-7.4.1)
  - [Ephemeral Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDHE)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-7.4.2)

###### Label

The **Label** value is needed to distinguish between application level protocols
that rely on Exported Keying Material. Currently we are using the following
Label values:

- `EXPERIMENTAL Google Confidential Computing Client Attestation 1.0`
- `EXPERIMENTAL Google Confidential Computing Server Attestation 1.0`

The main parts of the Label value include:

- `EXPERIMENTAL` prefix
  - Required by [RFC5705](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5705#section-4) to
    avoid possible collisions with existing
    [IANA](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5226)-registered labels
- `Client`/`Server`
  - Separate Label values for clients and servers are necessary to prevent
    ambiguity and confusion about Label usage
- Version
  - Necessary to allow protocol upgrades in the future

##### Context

**Context** is a parameter used to derive separate Tokens for different
[assertion](#assertions) types provided by the firmware. Context value is

> represented by an assertion type, for which a Token is derived.

Reviewer: In what sense it is "represented by"? I thought it **is** an assertion type? But also not sure it is defined what assertion type means.

Author: It is defined further in the RFC `[assertion](#assertions)`
Updated to `Context value is equal to the assertion type`

| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

The protocol supports multiple assertion types (e.g. Intel SGX ECDSA, AMD
SEV-SNP, public key), each having a type uniquely identified by a string.

#### Initial Handshake

Since applications can run on various platforms, both client and server need to
negotiate a list of assertions types they can provide and will accept. The
negotiation is performed at the application level prior to remote attestation
and looks as follows:

1. **Client** sends to the **Server** a list of
   [assertions](https://asylo.dev/docs/concepts/ekep.html#client_precommit-message)
   types it will accept
1. **Server** replies with a list of
   [assertions](https://asylo.dev/docs/concepts/ekep.html#server_precommit-message)
   types it will accept

Currently we are using the following assertion types:

- `intel_sgx_ecdsa_0_1_report`
- `amd_sev_snp_0_1_report`
- `vtpm_public_key`
- `eddsa_public_key`

Assertion types that represent TEE reports also include _Trusted Computing base

> (TCB)_ versions.

Author: Removed as unnecessary

#### Assertion Generation

The _Generate Assertion_ procedure in the workflow is described as follows in
the case of TEE-based remote attestation:

1. Derive a **Token** from the TLS session
   1. **Token** is generated via deriving Exported Keying Material from an
      established TLS session with a specified set of parameters
1. Put the **Token** into the **TEE report** request
   1. This means that when TEE platform signs a **TEE report**, it also signs
      the provided **Token**
1. Request a **TEE report** from hardware
1. Firmware generates and signs a **TEE report**
   1. The signed **TEE report** also gives clients information about the TEE
      itself (its version and etc.) and about the code that is running inside
      the TEE
1. Combine the hardware generated **TEE report** with a certificate signed by
   the **Provider**’s root key
   1. This is required for checking the validity of **TEE reports** and TEE

>       platform keys that were used to sign them

Reviewer: This is only about TEE-related assertions, right?

Author: Correct, changed to optional step

Since Client and Server can exchange multiple assertions, each assertion should

> contain a **Token** that was derived using a separate Context parameter.

Reviewer: Not necessarily. e.g. if the server has 10 key pairs, it will bind all of the corresponding assertions to the same token, right?

Author: How would it bind all these keys to the same token?
